---
title: "10 Usability Heuristics"
publishedOn: 2025-03-04
slug: "10-usability-heuristics"
tagline: "Learn Jakob Nielsen's 10 usability heuristics for user interface design"
tags: ["hci", 'ui', 'ux']
---

# 10 Usability Heuristics

These 10 principles are designed to guide the design of user interfaces that are
easy to use and understand. They were set out by a man called Jakob Nielsen in
1994.

## 1. Visibility of System Status

The design should always keep users informed about what's going on. If something
is loading or waiting the user should be made aware and preferably immediately.

## 2. Match between the System and the Real World

The system should "speak the users language" so that the user can understand
what the system is outputting. Use language and conventions from the real world,
it may be technology but the people using it are from the real world and
understand things from the real world.

## 3. User Control and Freedom

Users should be able to roam a website, going back, forward, canceling an
action, undo, etc. Users should be in control.

## 4. Consistency and Standards

The design should be consistent with other systems and follow established
standards. This helps users understand how to interact with the system. You can
deviate from standards (otherwise everything would look the same) but knowing
when and how much by is the key.

There are 2 types of consistency: internal and external. Internal consistency is
your own consistency. Take a website, if you have a button that's green with a
light gray background and then apply those styles to a piece of plain text, the
user would be mislead into thinking the text is now a button.

External consistency is where standards are external, take a e-commerce site.
There will be a cart feature, it is common for this feature to be an icon in the
top right of the site, that looks like a shopping card/trolley. This is easily
recognizable to the user.

## 5. Error Prevention

This states that there should be features and design that prevents the user from
committing an error. Take a button, the button should be visible, with contrast
from background to foreground, it should be sized right so that people can click
it confidently without clicking a different button. Or it could be something
like a confirmation dialog to prevent a big action.

## 6. Recognition Over Recall

The different between recognition and recall is the amount of cues that you are
given. If you are given enough cues as context you will not need to recall
information, you can recognize it, which is easier for the user. Take icons,
it's all well and good designing a new save icon but unless everyone knows the
meaning of the action behind the icon is to save it is pointless.

The user should be able to recognize what they are seeing instead of having to
dig in memory for something.

## 7. Flexibility and Efficiency

The world is *very* big, there are lots of people, and those people have
different ways of completing the same task. Some people live by the keyboard and
do not like using a mouse, some people like a trackpad and gestures.

New users should be able to use the system, but users who would like to be more
efficient should be able accelerate their flow, this could be by liking a photo
on instagram by double tapping or by clicking `CMD-C` to copy instead of right
click, copy.

## 8. Aesthetic and Minimalist Design

The signal-to-noise ratio (useful-to-irrelevant) should be high, the useful and
relative information is in battle with the irrelevant information so let there
be more useful information "signal". Whitespace can be fantastic at drawing
attention to a particular space.

## 9. Help Users Recognize, Diagnose and Recover from Errors

Let users know if something has gone wrong, explain what is the problem, and
then give an action (or more) to fix the error. Or offer a way to move on from
the issue.

## 10. Help and Documentation

Users should be able to find help or documentation for your system. This could
be via live chat, popover, or a help page. The documentation should be easily
searchable, focuses on the users task, and list concrete steps to resolve the
issue.
